<h2>Reflection Statement</h2>
<p>
During the course of this semester, ENGL 1650 Introduction to Digital Humanities offered me the opportunity to explore the field of digital humanities both in theory and in practice. Having no prior knowledge of digital humanities, I did not know what to expect from this course, but was interested in how humanities relate to rising digitalization and signed up to expose myself to the field.
</p>
<p>As a political science major, I found the preliminary material relevant to my personal interest regarding proper representation. While not strictly political, the various ways in which different groups of people are represented or underrepresented in the digital world was fascinating to learn about and guided much of my work/thought processes in this class. I found that Guiliano & Heitman and Berry raised important points about the digital representation of historically underrepresented groups, which related to my Printing in Prisons project when discussing prisoners with disabilities, an underrepresented group. Guiliano & Heitman wrote about Indigenous American data’s limitations in accurately representing Indigenous culture. Because Indigenous data was historically collected by non-Indigenous individuals, it has high potential to be unreflective of what indigenous individuals consider important. For example, Guiliano & Heitman cited a Buffalo hide which served as a mnemonic record-keeping device. The hide was kept in record as its final form, however, data which reflected indigenous culture would treat every individual pictograph as a singular data representation. Berry discussed the limitations of archives of African Amerians, as they frequently included data which was unclear or did not fully represent the individuals who they were about due to a lack of proper record keeping and representative curation by the individuals certing the archives. One point that particularly stood out to me was the fact that many archives tend to be disorganized or nonexistent unless taken interest in by someone willing to invest a considerable amount of work into accurately representing them. </p>
<p>When creating my Printing in Prisons project, I noticed that many aspects of Guiliano & Heitman’s and Berry’s writing resonated with the topic of prisoners with disabilities. Firstly, Berry’s point about organized and well-curated archives existing due to individual’s interest in taking on the task could have applied to the lack of information on prisoners with disabilities. I could not find any information about people with disabilities at Eastern State Penitentiary on the internet, on Eastern State Penitentiary's website, or during their tour, although other groups such as African Americans, women, and LGBTQ+ individuals were featured. Of course, people with disabilities existed in Eastern State Penitentiary, which was referenced in some articles in the Eastern Echo. However, it does not seem that anyone curated articles or presentations on prisoners with disabilities. Berry’s point about many archives on African Americans being showcased after George Floyd, may reflect this. Disability is not a salient topic in today’s media, to the extent of topics such as race, gender, and sexuality. As Berry described, more salience in the media has previously mobilized more people to undertake the work of representing a group and understanding that they should be represented in the first place.</p>
<p>Berry and Guiliano & Heitman’s point regarding the importance of self-representation in data curation caused me to wonder if this may run into problems with certain types of disability. Archival data may be created by people who don't have disabilities and in some cases, this is the only way that it can be created. For example, someone might have a very severe developmental disability and cannot easily represent themselves. Would they be represented by someone in their “community” and how would that be defined? Their friends and family? Or would it have to be people with their type of disability? Which would be more representative? When conceptualizing this dilemma of representation, I thought of my brother who has borderline nonverbal autism and really cannot express himself beyond his likes/dislikes and basic needs. To curate his self-expression, there would need to be a fair amount of interpretation made by the creator. Would this diminish the authenticity of the data recorded? Furthermore, my brother is personally unable to conceptualize many concepts important to his life. He cannot articulate the damaging policies of his elementary school or abuse that he witnessed in his education classroom (which I witnessed on many occasions). Toy trains and apps on his iPad are personally more important to him, and this is similar to a lot of other people. Studying political science has made me understand that representing the societal factors in his life is undeniably useful. Furthermore, I have seen how digital humanities may play a large role in representation, since online archives promote accessibility to topics which can increase their salience overall. Even the process of studying the topics that we did in this class is responsible for putting them on the minds of students–creating possibilities for future study/creation of digital archives. Yet the dilemma still exists between proper representation and the usefulness of representation. Therefore the trade-off between representation of a person as they perceive themselves and portrayal of what an outsider views as important might face a high level of nuance when it comes to certain types of disabilities. I tried to respect this dilemma in my research by not characterizing prisoners with disabilities’ experiences beyond clearly hypothetical examples. If I were to approach this topic again, I would take more time to fully investigate what life was like at Eastern State Penitentiary for prisoners with disabilities, taking all types of disability into account. Unfortunately, I don’t think that this data exists online, so to get this understanding, I would most likely participate in the archival level research discussed in class.</p>
<p> Similarly, throughout the course I found it fascinating how extensive labor was in the digitalization of data. I especially realised this during our visit to SCETI where I got to see how hands-on the process was as a whole. However, until I completed my EC project and attended both of my workshops at the end of the semester, I did not fully conceptualize the actual labor which goes into a digital humanities project. My group’s work in the EC gave me the responsibility of making a meaningful digital humanities project, which my team wanted to convey in meaningfully picking out materials, which was quite time consuming. Also, I believe that the work I undertook in the EC and experience in workshops helped me contextualize more of the labor aspect in what I was researching for my Printing in Prisons project. The programs which I scrutinized in my Printing in Prison’s project on disability were likely formed with immense labor by their founders. Programs take time to design, recruit interested coworkers/employees for, and advocate for in terms of funding and application. Although not on the same scale as the prison disability programs, I could better understand from my working experience problems that could have arisen in terms of collaboration, synthesis of ideas, work allocation, or proper administration of these programs by prison staff themselves. For example, the design of our project in the EC changed significantly up until we stopped working on it, something which could have happened with the disability programs. For all I know, they could have originally been designed to be more accessible, but faced roadblocks in terms of funding and/or convincing others of their value which produced their final product. Similarly, when working with the staff in the EC, one of the staff members misunderstood our intention to have the numbers on the bottom of our graph and the design of the prison surrounding the graph visible and used a glue product that melted some of these designs. These types of communication errors, although not very high stakes in our project, could have existed in prisons regarding staff treatment of prisoners with disabilities, and have impactful results unintended by their founders. Furthermore, at the card-making workshop at Kislak, I would have preferred a red and green Christmas card instead of a blue and green Christmas card, but had to make do with what was offered, which could have been reflected in prison programs which may not have had enough resources to provide optimal care or qualified staff to serve all deserving prisoners. For this reason, although I believe that disability programs should be as good as they can be and accessible to all prisoners, I gained a better understanding of actual labor in this course. Thus, I tried to allow for the context in which the programs arose in my writing, which could have been modified beyond the intent of their founders—I do not know if there was this context or whether the founders had this dilemma, but I did not want to assume and hope that this was reflected in my writing. </p>
<p>In conclusion, this course familiarized me with the concept of digital humanities in terms of mindful representation of data and labor. I enjoyed all aspects of this course, but the Printing in Prisons project had the most impact on my personal understanding of digital humanities as it helped me conceptualize some of the mechanisms behind societal representation which is something very important to me. Although I might have gotten different takeaways from the material than others due to focusing on a specific topic, I was glad to have explored what I did in this course and am excited to become more consciously involved in the digital humanities sphere in the future. </p>
